What is it and why do you need it?
Git is a version control system.
Before we jump into understanding what is a fashion control system, let's take a look at the life.
Before there was a fashion control system.
So you have your application server where your code will be running and you will have a developer with
some sort of a folder with the name version 1.0 with a code inside it, and this code is deployed in
the server.
So now the server is running code version 1.0.
Now our team member comes in and said, I have a great idea.
Send me your code.
So this team member will have a folder named version 2.0 where he saved his version of the code and
this code is deployed into the server.
But what if his code is not properly tested and crashed and burned?
The server rolling back to version 1.0 is super painful now because there is no centralized mechanism
to do it because everything is maintained in this kind of folder structure.
So in this case, rollback is time consuming.
There is no audit tracking, such as there is no way to know which team member did exactly what changes
in the application code and it is not scalable for large teams.
Hence version control system were born with version control system.
There will be a special database called repository and developers, instead of pushing their code directly
to the application server will push their code to this repository and the code will be deployed from
this repository to the application server.
If another team member comes in and wants to work on the code instead of requesting the other team member,
he can fetch the code from this repository and then modify it, have a new version, and then push this
new version, version 2.0 to this repository.
And after this version 2.0 gets deployed in the server, even if something goes wrong with a single
command or a click, this repository can roll back the code to the previous version.
So Git is a version control system and that's why it was born.
So why Git?
Because it is distributed.
So when you talk about version control systems, there are two different kinds centralized fashion control
system and distributed version control system.
With centralized version control system, there will be a centralized repository and all the developers
will connect to it.
The challenge with centralized repositories this repository is a single point of failure and it requires
constant connectivity.
Some example of centralized repository function control systems are subversion and endeavor.
In contrary to this, in a distributed fashion control system such as Git.
In addition to having a remote repository, each team member will also have a local repository which
is in their local machine, and they can do all their work, even push their changes to this local repository.
Once they are happy with their changes in their local repository, they can push all their changes to
this remote repository.
Even if you lose the connectivity to the remote repository, it doesn't impact your work because all
you need to do is push your changes to the local repository.
And once connectivity comes up, that change can be pushed to the remote repository.
So for distributed version control system, each developer has a local copy.
It is more scalable than centralized because each team member is working separately with their local
repository.
Some example of distributed version control system is mercurial and gate.
So going back to our version control system features who I get it is distributed, it is performant,
it has detailed audit tracking, it shows which developer did exactly what changes and when.
Git is also open source, which means it is free.
Some of the real world use cases of git are Kubernetes, Gitops, Jenkins integration and other DevOps
tools and various other repository is built on this git such as GitHub, GitLab could commit, etc.
So one thing which is very important to remember is git is not same as Git Hub.